[EDU-2851] feat: Mongodb template guide (#460)
aziontech/docs: src/content/docs/en/pages/guides/marketplace/templates/mongodb-template/mongodb-template.mdx

---

> title: How to deploy a database on the edge with the MongoDB Atlas template

Author: ```suggestion
title: How to deploy a database on the edge with the MongoDB Atlas boilerplate
```

> description: This template helps you to deploy a database on the edge and manage it via API.

Author: ```suggestion
description: This template helps you to deploy an application integrated with MongoDB Atlas on the edge and manage it via API.
```

meta_tags: templates, guides, Azion Marketplace
namespace: docs_guides_mongodb_template
permalink: /documentation/products/guides/mongodb-atlas/
---
import Badge from '~/components/Badge.astro';

<Badge variant="accent">
Preview
</Badge>

> The **MongoDB Atlas** template allows you to deploy a database directly on Azion's edge. Besides, due to the integration with the Atlas Data API, you're able to create, retrieve, update, and delete items in your collections through standard HTTPS requests.

Author: ```suggestion
The **MongoDB Atlas** allows yoy to deploy an application integrated with MongoDB Atlas on the edge. Besides, due to the integration with the Atlas Data API, you're able to create, retrieve, update, and delete items in your collections through standard HTTPS requests.
```

By using **Azion Edge Platform** to run your database project, your digital data and assets benefit from edge computing capabilities, including faster delivery, lower latency, and enhanced security.

---

## Requirements

Before using this template, you need to: 

- Create a [MongoDB account](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas/register).
- Create a [cluster](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/create-database-deployment/) and add a new database.
- Create a collection to be used with this template.
- Active the service [Atlas Data API](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/app-services/data-api/).
- Generate API key in [Atlas Service](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/app-services/authentication/api-key/#std-label-api-key-authentication).
- Generate your [GitHub personal token](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens#creating-a-personal-access-token-classic).

:::note

> While generating your GitHub personal token, grant that your **scope** has the permission to authorize an OAuth app or a personal token to access to public and private repositories, including read and write access to code. You must also enable the **workflow** option to allow adding and updating GitHub Actions workflow files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While generating your GitHub personal token, grant that your **scope** has the permission to authorize an OAuth app or a personal token to access public and private repositories, including read and write access to code. You must also enable the **workflow** option to allow adding and updating GitHub Actions workflow files.
```

Note that permissions can be scoped either to a user, an organization, or a repository. Read the [Creating a personal access token documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens#creating-a-personal-access-token-classic) for more information.
:::

---

## Getting the template

To use the **MongoDB Atlas** template, access [Real-Time Manager (RTM)](https://manager.azion.com/) and select the **Start with a template** option on the homepage.

> This will open a new page where you can select the **MongoDB Atlas** card.

Author: ```suggestion
This will open a new page where you can select the **MongoDB Atlas Boilerplate** card.
```

- <Badge>[Application Acceleration](/en/documentation/products/edge-application/application-acceleration/)</Badge>

You need to activate these modules separately via RTM. To do so:

1. [Access RTM](https://manager.azion.com/).
2. On the upper-left corner, select the three horizontal lines to open the **Products menu**.
3. In the **BUILD** section, select **Edge Application**.
4. You'll be redirected to the **Edge Application** page.
- It lists all the edge applications you've created. 
5. Find the edge application related to your template and select it. 
6. In the **Main Settings** tab, find the **Edge Application Modules** section and activate the switch for the product you want to enable.

:::caution[Warning]
If these modules are activated, the execution of this template could generate usage-related costs. Check the [pricing page](https://www.azion.com/en/pricing/) for more information. 

Any cost generated by MongoDB usage will be processed and billed separately on the MongoDB platform. Visit the [MongoDB Atlas documentation](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/) for more details.
:::

---

## HTTPS requests examples

> The integration with the Atlas Data API enables you to access the data using standard HTTPS requests. Acting as a middleware to access and manage your data, the API sits between your clusted and the client requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The integration with the Atlas Data API enables you to access the data using standard HTTPS requests. Acting as a middleware to access and manage your data, the API sits between your cluster and the client requests.
```

> You're able to create, retrieve, update, and delete items in your collections through any tools that allows you to send standard HTTPS requests, such as your terminal or Postman.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You're able to create, retrieve, update, and delete items in your collections through any tools that allow you to send standard HTTPS requests, such as your terminal or Postman.
```

3. In the **BUILD** section, select **Edge Application**.
4. You'll be redirected to the **Edge Application** page.
- It lists all the edge applications you've created. 
5. Find the edge application related to the Hello World template and select it. 
- The list is organized alphabetically. You can also use the **search bar** located in the upper-left corner of the list; currently, it filters only by **Application Name**.

After selecting the edge application you'll work on, you'll be directed to a page containing all the settings you can configure.

:::tip
Read the documentation about [managing edge applications](/en/documentation/products/edge-application/first-steps/) for more details.
:::

### Continuous deployment

Once the template is deployed, you can also edit and update your args and code, as well as implement a continuous deployment workflow. However, you'll need first to *declare secrets on your project's GitHub repository* to complete the second build with the changes. When the second build is completed, you'll be able to manage your project with a continuous deployment workflow and edit the args as desired.

> To do so, open your new **Hello World** template repository on GitHub. Then, go to **Settings** > **Secrets and variables** > **Action** to [add your variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets), following these instructions:

Author: ```suggestion
To do so, open your new **MongoDB Atlas Boilerplate** repository on GitHub. Then, go to **Settings** > **Secrets and variables** > **Action** to [add your variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets), following these instructions:
```

---
title: How to deploy a database on the edge with the MongoDB Atlas template
description: This template helps you to deploy a database on the edge and manage it via API.
meta_tags: templates, guides, Azion Marketplace
namespace: docs_guides_mongodb_template
permalink: /documentation/products/guides/mongodb-atlas/
---
import Badge from '~/components/Badge.astro';

<Badge variant="accent">
Preview
</Badge>

> The **MongoDB Atlas** template allows you to deploy a database directly on the Azion's edge. Besides, thanks to the integration with the Atlas Data API, you're able to create, retrieve, update, and delete items in your collections through standard HTTPS requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **MongoDB Atlas** template allows you to deploy a database directly on Azion's edge. Besides, due to the integration with the Atlas Data API, you're able to create, retrieve, update, and delete items in your collections through standard HTTPS requests.
```

By using **Azion Edge Platform** to run your database project, your digital data and assets benefit from edge computing capabilities, including faster delivery, lower latency, and enhanced security.

---

## Requirements

Before using this template, you need to: 

- Create a [MongoDB account](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas/register).
- Create a [cluster](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/create-database-deployment/) and add a new database.
- Create a collection to be used with this template.
- Active the service [Atlas Data API](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/app-services/data-api/).
- Generate API key in [Atlas Service](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/app-services/authentication/api-key/#std-label-api-key-authentication).

> - Generate your [GitHub personal token]((https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens#creating-a-personal-access-token-classic)).

Author: ```suggestion
- Generate your [GitHub personal token](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens#creating-a-personal-access-token-classic).
```

:::note
While generating your GitHub personal token, grant that your **scope** has the permission to authorize an OAuth app or a personal token to access to public and private repositories, including read and write access to code. You must also enable the **workflow** option to allow adding and updating GitHub Actions workflow files.

> Note that permissions can be scoped either to a user an organization or a repository. Read the [Creating a personal access token documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens#creating-a-personal-access-token-classic) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that permissions can be scoped either to a user, an organization, or a repository. Read the [Creating a personal access token documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens#creating-a-personal-access-token-classic) for more information.
```

:::

---

## Getting the template

To use the **MongoDB Atlas** template, access [Real-Time Manager (RTM)](https://manager.azion.com/) and select the **Start with a template** option on the homepage.

This will open a new page where you can select the **MongoDB Atlas** card.

---

## Setting up the template

Once you're in the template's page, click the **Settings** tab to open the configuration form and provide the information to configure your application. 

Fields identified with an asterisk are mandatory.

> - **Application Name***: the name of your edge application on Azion.
> - **GitHub Personal Token***: your GitHub personal token.
> - **Atlas API Token***: the token to authorize the connection with the AtlasData API.
> - **Atlas API URL***: the assigned URL endpoint to connect with Atlas Data API.
> - **Collection Name***: the name of a created collection in the specified database.
> - **Database Name***: the name of the created database in the MongoDB Atlas data source.
> - **dataSource Name***: the name of the created MongoDB Atlas data source or cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Application Name** *: the name of your edge application on Azion.
- **GitHub Personal Token** *: your GitHub personal token.
- **Atlas API Token** *: the token to authorize the connection with the AtlasData API.
- **Atlas API URL** *: the assigned URL endpoint to connect with Atlas Data API.
- **Collection Name** *: the name of a created collection in the specified database.
- **Database Name** *: the name of the created database in the MongoDB Atlas data source.
- **dataSource Name** *: the name of the created MongoDB Atlas data source or cluster.
```

> After completing all the information, click the **Next** button, located in the bottom-right corner to start the deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After completing all the information, click the **Next** button, located in the bottom-right corner, to start the deployment.
```

This page shows you the following sections:

   - **Access your Edge Application** section includes the link to visit and explore your edge application.
   - **Build Summary** contains the application's name and function.
   - The **Deployment details** tab can be opened to access the logs related to the deployment.
   - **What do you want to do next?** provides recommendations regarding advanced options to enhance your edge application: **Customize Domain**, **Manage Edge Application**, **View Edge Application Metrics**, **View Edge Application Logs**, and the **Back to Home** button.

:::note
The link to the edge application allows you to see it on the browser. However, it takes a certain time to propagate and configure the application in Azion's edge locations. It may be necessary to wait a few minutes for the URL to be activated and for the application page to be effectively displayed in the browser.
:::

### Key configurations

By deploying this template, the script creates:

> - an edge application to run your project and manage all your settings.
> - an Azion domain to access your edge application. You can also set up a custom domain to run on this edge application.
> - an edge function containing custom logic.
> - a GitHub repository for your project. The repository includes a GitHub Action that, by being activated, guarantees a [continuous deployment workflow](#continuous-deployment). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An edge application to run your project and manage all your settings.
- An Azion domain to access your edge application. You can also set up a custom domain to run on this edge application.
- An edge function containing custom logic.
- A GitHub repository for your project. The repository includes a GitHub Action that, by being activated, guarantees a [continuous deployment workflow](#continuous-deployment). 
```

The execution of this template also includes integration with Mongo DB Atlas and Atlas Data API, acting as a middleware to manage and access your database.

> Additionally, to guarantee the optimal performance of this template, it's necessary to activate:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, to guarantee the optimal performance of this template, you must activate:
```

> - [Edge Functions](/en/documentation/products/edge-application/edge-functions/)
> - [Application Acceleration](/en/documentation/products/edge-application/application-acceleration/)

Author: ```suggestion
- <Badge>[Edge Functions](/en/documentation/products/edge-application/edge-functions/)</Badge>
- <Badge>[Application Acceleration](/en/documentation/products/edge-application/application-acceleration/)</Badge>
```

> - [Edge Functions](https://www.azion.com/en/documentation/products/edge-application/edge-functions/)
> - [Application Acceleration](https://azion.com/en/documentation/products/edge-application/application-acceleration/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Edge Functions](/en/documentation/products/edge-application/edge-functions/)
- [Application Acceleration](/en/documentation/products/edge-application/application-acceleration/)
```

You need to activate these modules separately via RTM. To do so:

1. [Access RTM](https://manager.azion.com/).
2. On the upper-left corner, select the three horizontal lines to open the **Products menu**.
3. In the **BUILD** section, select **Edge Application**.
4. You'll be redirected to the **Edge Application** page.
- It lists all the edge applications you've created. 
5. Find the edge application related to your template and select it. 

> 6. In the **Main Settings** tab, find the **Edge Application Modules** section and active the switch for the product you want to enable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. In the **Main Settings** tab, find the **Edge Application Modules** section and activate the switch for the product you want to enable.
```

:::

---

## HTTPS requests examples

The integration with the Atlas Data API enables you to access the data using standard HTTPS requests. Acting as a middleware to access and manage your data, the API sits between your clusted and the client requests.

You're able to create, retrieve, update, and delete items in your collections through any tools that allows you to send standard HTTPS requests, such as your terminal or Postman.

The API has dedicated endpoints according to the operation you want to complete.

#### Finding a document

```bash
curl -s "https://data.mongodb-api.com/app/$CLIENT_APP_ID/endpoint/data/v1/action/findOne" \
  -X POST \
  -H "apiKey: $API_KEY" \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/ejson' \
  -H "Accept: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "dataSource": "my-datasource",
    "database": "my-database-azion",
    "collection": "template",
    "filter": {
      "text": "Do the dishes"
    }
  }'
```

Where: 

| Variable | Required | Type | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `dataSource` | Yes | String | The name of your data source or cluster |

> | `database` | Yes | String | The name of the database in data source |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `database` | Yes | String | The name of the database in the data source |
```

| `collection` | Yes | String | The name of a created collection in the specified database |
| `filter` | Yes | Object | A query operator to filter the documents |

#### Inserting a document

```bash
curl -s "https://data.mongodb-api.com/app/$CLIENT_APP_ID/endpoint/data/v1/action/insertOne" \
  -X POST \
  -H "apiKey: $API_KEY" \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/ejson' \
  -H "Accept: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "dataSource": "my-datasource",
    "database": "my-database-azion",
    "collection": "template",
    "document": {
      "status": "open",
      "text": "Do the dishes"
    }
  }'

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```

Where: 

| Variable | Required | Type | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `dataSource` | Yes | String | The name of your data source or cluster |

> | `database` | Yes | String | The name of the database in data source |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `database` | Yes | String | The name of the database in the data source |
```

| `collection` | Yes | String | The name of a created collection in the specified database |
| `document` | Yes | Object | The document to insert into the collection |

#### Updating a document

```bash
curl -s "https://data.mongodb-api.com/app/$CLIENT_APP_ID/endpoint/data/v1/action/updateOne" \
  -X POST \
  -H "apiKey: $API_KEY" \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/ejson' \
  -H "Accept: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "dataSource": "my-datasource",
    "database": "my-database-azion",
    "collection": "template",
    "filter": {
      "_id": { "$oid": "64224f4d089104f1766116a5" }
    },
    "update": {
      "$set": {
        "status": "complete",
        "completedAt": { "$date": { "$numberLong": "1680105272788" } }
      }
    }
  }'

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```

Where: 

| Variable | Required | Type | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `dataSource` | Yes | String | The name of your data source or cluster |

> | `database` | Yes | String | The name of the database in data source |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `database` | Yes | String | The name of the database in the data source |
```

| `collection` | Yes | String | The name of a created collection in the specified database |
| `filter` | Yes | Object | A query operator to filter the documents |
| `update` | Yes | Object | An update expression to apply to matching documents |

#### Deleting a document

```bash
curl -s "https://data.mongodb-api.com/app/$CLIENT_APP_ID/endpoint/data/v1/action/deleteOne" \
  -X POST \
  -H "apiKey: $API_KEY" \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/ejson' \
  -H "Accept: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "dataSource": "my-datasource",
    "database": "my-database-azion",
    "collection": "template",
    "filter": {
      "_id": { "$oid": "64224f3cd79f54ad342dd9b2" }
    }
  }'

```

Where: 

| Variable | Required | Type | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `dataSource` | Yes | String | The name of your data source or cluster |

> | `database` | Yes | String | The name of the database in data source |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `database` | Yes | String | The name of the database in the data source |
```

| `collection` | Yes | String | The name of a created collection in the specified database |
| `filter` | No | Object | A query operator to filter the documents |

All the requests return a response in `JSON` or `EJSON` format, including the information according to the status code: `200 Success`, `400 Bad Request`, and `401 Unauthorized`.

:::tip

> For more examples and learn how to work with batches, go to the [Atlas Data API](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/app-services/data-api/) documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more examples and to learn how to work with batches, go to the [Atlas Data API](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/app-services/data-api/) documentation.
```

:::

---

> ## Managing the template

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

## Managing the template
```

To do so, open your new **Hello World** template repository on GitHub. Then, go to **Settings** > **Secrets and variables** > **Action** to [add your variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets), following these instructions:

1. Add the Azion personal token to the *secrets*:
- Read [how to generate an Azion personal token](/en/documentation/products/guides/personal-tokens/) in the documentation.

```bash
    AZION_PERSONAL_TOKEN=<value>
```

2. Add the environments that'll be used in the action workflow in the **main.yml** file, included in the **.github/workflows** folder of your repository:

```yml title=".github/workflows/main.yml"
  - name: edge-...
    id: azion_edge
    ...
    with:
        ....
        azionPersonalToken: ${{ secrets.AZION_PERSONAL_TOKEN }}
        ....

```

3. Open a pull request to merge the changes to the main branch and start the automatic deployment.

> Now, your project is ready to work with a continuous deployment workflow, updating instantly any changes in the application or the repository. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, your project is ready to work with a continuous deployment workflow, instantly updating any changes in the application or the repository. 
```
